
(All questions are Easy and discussed in class)
Question 1. Write short note on CPU scheduling algorithms (5 marks)



CPU Scheduling is a process of determining which process will own CPU for execution while another process is on hold. The
 main task of CPU scheduling is to make sure that whenever the CPU remains idle, the OS at least select one of the 
 processes available in the ready queue for execution. The selection process will be carried out by the CPU scheduler. It 
 selects one of the processes in memory that are ready for execution.

There are mainly six types of process scheduling algorithms

First Come First Serve (FCFS)
Shortest-Job-First (SJF) Scheduling
Shortest Remaining Time
Priority Scheduling
Round Robin Scheduling
Multilevel Queue Scheduling









Question 2. What is preemptive vs non preemptive scheduling algos (5 marks)


Non-preemptive Scheduling is used when a process terminates, or a process switches from running to waiting state. In this 
scheduling, once the resources (CPU cycles) is allocated to a process, the process holds the CPU till it gets terminated 
or it reaches a waiting state. In case of non-preemptive scheduling does not interrupt a process running CPU in middle of 
the execution. Instead, it waits till the process complete its CPU burst time and then it can allocate the CPU to another 
process. 

In preemptive scheduling the CPU is allocated to the processes for the limited time whereas in Non-preemptive scheduling,
 the CPU is allocated to the process till it terminates or switches to waiting state





Question 3. Write the best and/or practical scheduling algo, with reason ? (5 marks)




A typical process involves both I/O time and CPU time. In a uni programming system like MS-DOS, time spent waiting for I/
O is wasted and CPU is free during this time. In multi programming systems, one process can use CPU while another is 
waiting for I/O. This is possible only with process scheduling.

Max CPU utilization [Keep CPU as busy as possible]
Fair allocation of CPU.
Max throughput [Number of processes that complete their execution per time unit]
Min turnaround time [Time taken by a process to finish execution]
Min waiting time [Time a process waits in ready queue]
Min response time [Time when a process produces first response]
